Jrte is about inversion of control for high-volume text analysis and information extraction and transformation. An input source 
presents as a generator of sequences of ordinal numbers (eg, UNICODE ordinal). If those sequences have a coherent pattern that can
be described in terms of catenation, union and repetition then that description determines a unique regular set. This input pattern
description can then be extended to interleave at each input ordinal a sequence of output ordinals, which Jrte associates with 
effector methods expressed by a target class bound to the transduction. This input/output pattern description is compiled by ginr 
to build a state-minimized finite state automaton (DFA).

The Jrte compiler performs a transition-minimizing transformation on automata compiled by ginr to build transducers that it packages
in a gearbox library for runtime use. The Jrte runtime loads transducers on demand and provides a simple interface for running and 
controlling transduction processes. Each transduction process has a transducer stack, so running transducers can call each other 
(and themselves, recursively), and an input stack, so called transducers can return information to callers. Jrte extends the set 
of input ordinals with a small (extensible) set of signal ordinals that are never generated by the source and can be used as 
unambiguous return codes.

You will need ginr v2.0.2 from googlecode to build jrte. Ginr can be cloned or downloaded from https://github.com/ntozubod/ginr.

To build ginr, 

```
	mkdir -p ~/bin 
	cd src
	make -f Makefile install
```	

This will install the ginr executable in ~/bin. 

ginr must be on your search PATH before building jrte. To build jrte, 

```
	ant -f build.xml all-clean
```	

To compile transducers defined in `*.inr` files in a `patterns` directory using a common prologue `!prologue` to `*.dfa`
files in an `automata` directory and assemble them into a `gearbox` for the base target class `BaseTarget`,
for example,

```
	patterns=test-patterns/patterns
	automata=build/patterns/automata
	target=com.characterforming.jrte.base.BaseTarget
	compiler=com.characterforming.jrte.compile.GearboxCompiler
	gearbox=build/patterns/Jrte.gears
	cat $patterns/!prologue $patterns/*.inr | ginr 
	java -cp build/java/jrte-HEAD.jar $compiler --maxchar 128 --target $target $automata $gearbox
```

Any subclass of BaseTarget can serve as target class. The `--maxchar` parameter specifies the maximal input ordinal 
expected in input. The value 128 limits input text to 7-bit ASCII. Use `--maxchar=256` if 8-bit characters are 
required -- these must be encoded in ginr source files using `\xdd` equivalents. Note that at present 7-bit non-printing 
and all 8-bit characters must be encoded as `\xdd` equivalents for ginr. While `\x00` can be used as an input character 
ginr tokens of length >1 containing `\x00` will be truncated.

To transduce input <file> with any transducer compiled into a gearbox,

```
	runtime=com.characterforming.jrte.Jrte
	gearbox=build/patterns/Jrte.gears
	cat <file> | java -cp build/java/jrte-HEAD.jar $runtime [--nil] <transducer> <gearbox>
```

To build the Javadoc materials (only) for Jrte, 

```
	ant -f build.xml javadoc
```

See Javadoc at doc/index.html and etc/sh/*.sh for examples showing how to run simple transductions.

See LICENSE for licensing details.